DOCSP-41956: run a command (#129)
mongodb/docs-php-library: source/write/run-command.txt

.. _php-run-command:

======================
Run a Database Command
======================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: administration, code example

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the {+php-library+}
to run a database command. You can use database commands to perform a
variety of administrative and diagnostic tasks, such as fetching server
statistics, initializing a replica set, or running an aggregation pipeline.

.. important:: Prefer Library Methods to Database Commands

   The library provides wrapper methods for many database commands.
   We recommend using these methods instead of executing database
   commands when possible.
   
   To perform administrative tasks, use the :mongosh:`MongoDB Shell </>`
   instead of the {+php-library+}. Calling the ``db.runCommand()``
   method inside the shell is the preferred way to issue database
   commands, as it provides a consistent interface between the shell and

>    drivers or libraries.

Reviewer: I don't follow the last sentence here. How does `db.runCommand()` provide a "consistent interface between the shell and drivers or libraries"?

I would probably call out that the shell provides many more wrapper methods (aka helpers) for various administration commands: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/method/

And _those_ should probably also be preferred to running `db.runCommand()` or a driver's [command helper](https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/run-command/run-command.md).

The selling point of the command helper is that it's a primitive tool to run any command for which the shell or driver doesn't already provide a wrapper/helper.

Author: Reworded the language here to make it clear that there's a hierarchy of preferred ways to perform tasks

.. _php-execute-command:

Execute a Command
-----------------

To run a database command, you must specify the command and any relevant
parameters in a command document, then pass the command document to the
``MongoDB\Database::command()`` method. This method returns a

> ``Cursor`` object.

Reviewer: This is also a good place to explain that commands that return a single document will still have that result packaged in a cursor via the driver API. And this ties into the `$cursor->toArray()[0]` code I suggested above.

The following code shows how you can use the ``command()``

> method on a ``MongoDB\Driver\Database`` instance to run the ``hello``

Reviewer: This is a [MongoDB\Database](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/current/reference/class/MongoDBDatabase/) object. The PHP extension (i.e. `MongoDB\Driver` namespace) doesn't provide the common Client, Database, and Collection objects. I think you can use the `:phpclass:` directive to link to the API docs -- there should be prior art in other docs pages.

Author: thanks for pointing that out. Leaving the api links in the last section of the doc

command, which returns information about the current member's role in
the replica set:

.. code-block:: php

   $database = $client->selectDatabase('<db>');
   $result = $database->command(['hello' => 1]);

To find a link to a full list of database commands and corresponding
parameters, see the :ref:`Additional Information section
<php-addtl-info-runcommand>`.

.. note:: Read Preference

   The ``command()`` method does not obey the read preference you might
   have set on your ``Database`` instance elsewhere in your code. By
   default, ``command()`` uses the ``primary`` read preference.
   
   You can set a read preference for command execution by setting one
   in the options parameter, as shown in the following code:
   
   .. code-block:: php

      $readPref = new MongoDB\Driver\ReadPreference('primaryPreferred');

>       $result = $database->command(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      $cursor = $database->command(
```

Makes the code self-documenting and reminds users they'll need to iterate it. You can also add `$cursor->toArray()[0]` below if you want to demonstrate printing the result. If so, consider a code comment above the `echo` line like I suggested earlier:

```
// hello returns a single document, so print the first document in the cursor
```

Author: Changed the variable name - but in this simple example with no output, i think leaving out the iteration is ok.

Reviewer: So long as the variable is `$cursor` and we have a previous example demonstrating `->toArray()[0]`, I'm OK with skipping it here. Users can logical infer how they should work with it.

          ['hello' => 1], 
          ['readPreference' => $readPref]

>       );

Reviewer: Any reason this code examples here and above are inline instead of included from the `run-command.php` file?

Author: I can move them over!

   For more information on read preference options, see :manual:`Read
   Preference </core/read-preference/>` in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

.. _php-command-response:

Response
--------

The ``command()`` method returns a ``Cursor`` object that contains
the response from the database after the command has been executed.

Each database command performs a different function, so the response
content can vary depending on the command executed. However, every

> response contains a document with the following fields:

Reviewer: For commands that return a cursor (e.g. `aggregate`), users are never going to have access to these fields because the driver converts the cursor envelope (e.g. ID and first batch of results) in the raw command response into an iterable cursor. This differs from commands that return a single document, which the driver would package as a cursor object containing a single result (which is why we use `$cursor->toArray()[0]`).

If you're going to talk about how "response content can vary", I would clearly explain this difference between commands and mention how the PHP driver handles this. So users are responsible for knowing the response format of their command (usually discussed in the server manual) so they can either iterate or just dump the first and only document in the cursor.

For an example of a cursor envelop in a command response, see the first output example in [listCollections](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/command/listCollections/#list-all-collections). Running `listCollections` through PHP's `command()` helper will never reveal that raw response, as we're going to construct a cursor from the first batch. There will also be no more results, since the cursor ID is zero (i.e. all results returned in the first batch). If the cursor ID was non-zero, then iterating beyond the first batch would utilize a `getMore` command to read more cursor data from the server.

I just noticed there's some confusion about this in the server manual and opened [DOCSP-43843](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DOCSP-43843) to report that.

Author: I'll revise the introduction to that table, I will make the language more clear and indicate what the library behavior is here!

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Field
     - Description

   * - <command result>
     - Fields specific to the database command. For example,
       ``count`` returns the ``n`` field and ``explain`` returns the
       ``queryPlanner`` field.

   * - ``ok``
     - Whether the command has succeeded (``1``)

>        or failed (``0``).

Reviewer: You can note that the PHP driver will raise exceptions if the `ok` field is zero. It will likely be [CommandException](https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.mongodb-driver-exception-commandexception.php), which exposes a `getResultDocument()` method to obtain the command result document.

That behavior happens long before the PHP driver would try to unpack a command result with a cursor envelope, as a cursor envelope is part of a successful response and would already have an `ok: 1` field.

   * - ``operationTime``
     - The logical time of the operation. MongoDB uses the
       logical time to order operations. To learn more about this
       concept, see our blog  post about the :website:`Global Logical

>        Clock </blog/post/transactions-background-part-4-the-global-logical-clock>`.

Reviewer: `operationTime` is a BSON Timestamp type (not to be confused with a UTCDateTime). The PHP driver represents this as [MongoDB\BSON\Timestamp](https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.mongodb-bson-timestamp.php) if you want to use that.

I'm not sure about where this is discussed in the server manual, if at all, but relevant docs for these fields are in the following driver specs:

 * https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/causal-consistency/causal-consistency.md#server-command-responses
 * https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/sessions/driver-sessions.md

Author: I think this level of specificity is not necessary to include in this page

   * - ``$clusterTime``
     - A document that contains the signed cluster time. Cluster time is a
       logical time used for the ordering of operations.

       This document contains the following fields:

       - ``clusterTime``, the timestamp of the highest known cluster time for the member
       - ``signature``, a document that contains the hash of the cluster time and the ID

>          of the key used to sign the cluster time

Reviewer: Driver docs (including our specs) don't discuss the format of `$clusterTime`. It's only mentioned as being a BSON document. The type is intentionally opaque, as none of the driver APIs deal with these inner fields.

It looks like the content in this table was lifted from the [Go driver docs](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/go/current/fundamentals/run-command/#response).

I'll defer to you if it should be changed, but I'd probably suggest removing everything from "This document contains the following fields:" onward.

.. _php-command-example:

> Command Example

Reviewer: If you decide to improve this page to discuss commands that return a cursor, you can add another example for a cursor-bearing command like [listCollections](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/command/listCollections/). That would demonstrate how the driver automatically handles the cursor envelope and convey that the user never gets access to the original raw command result (it's technically still accessible via command monitoring if you dive into a CommandSucceededEvent).

---------------

The following example uses the ``command()`` method to run
the ``dbStats`` command to retrieve storage statistics for the
``accounts`` database:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/run-command.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-runcommand
   :end-before: end-runcommand

The output of this command includes information about the collections in
the database and describes the amount and size of data stored across
collections:

.. code-block:: none

   string(234) "[{"db":"accounts","collections":2,"views":0,"objects":5,"avgObjSize":22,
   "dataSize":110,"storageSize":8192,"totalFreeStorageSize":0,"numExtents":0,"indexes":2,

>    "indexSize":8192,"indexFreeStorageSize":0,"fileSize":0,"nsSizeMB":0,"ok":1}]"

Reviewer: Note: I suggested changing the output in the code file. You can avoid `var_dump()` and directly access the cursor's first and only document to make this more concise.

   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: administration, code example

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the {+php-library+}
to run a database command. You can use database commands to perform a
variety of administrative and diagnostic tasks, such as fetching server
statistics, initializing a replica set, or running an aggregation pipeline.

.. important:: Prefer Library Methods to Database Commands

   The library provides wrapper methods for many database commands.
   We recommend using these methods instead of executing database
   commands when possible.
   
   To perform administrative tasks, use the :mongosh:`MongoDB Shell </>`
   instead of the {+php-library+}. Calling the ``db.runCommand()``
   method inside the shell is the preferred way to issue database
   commands, as it provides a consistent interface between the shell and
   drivers or libraries.

.. _php-execute-command:

Execute a Command
-----------------

To run a database command, you must specify the command and any relevant
parameters in a command document, then pass the command document to the
``command()`` method. This method returns a ``Cursor`` object.

> The following code shows how you can use the ``command()``
> method to run the ``hello`` command, which returns information about
> the current member's role in the replica set, on a database:

Reviewer 2: The code example is showing the `ping` command. Update the description or update the code example to run 'hello' instead. (`ping` description in suggestion taken from the server manual)
```suggestion
The following code shows how you can use the ``command()``
method to run the ``ping`` command, which is a no-op command used to test whether a server is responding:
```

Author: oops let me rework!

.. code-block:: php

   $result = $database->command(['ping' => 1]);

To find a link to a full list of database commands and corresponding
parameters, see the :ref:`Additional Information section
<php-addtl-info-runcommand>`.

.. note:: Read Preference

   The ``command()`` method does not
   obey the read preference you might have set on your ``Database``
   instance elsewhere in your code. By default, ``command()`` uses the ``primary``
   read preference.
   
   You can set a read preference for command execution by setting one
   in the options parameter, as shown in the following code:
   
   .. code-block:: php

      $readPref = new MongoDB\Driver\ReadPreference('primaryPreferred');
      $result = $database->command(
          ['ping' => 1], 
          ['readPreference' => $readPref]
      );

   For more information on read preference options, see :manual:`Read

>    Preference </core/read-preference/>` in the Server manual.

Reviewer 2: S: to align with our other repos
```suggestion
   Preference </core/read-preference/>` in the MongoDB Server manual.
```

.. _php-command-response:

Response
--------

The ``command()`` method returns a ``Cursor`` object that contains
the response from the database after the command has been executed.

Each database command performs a different function, so the response
content can vary depending on the command executed. However, every
response contains a document with the following fields:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Field
     - Description

   * - <command result>
     - Fields specific to the database command. For example,
       ``count`` returns the ``n`` field and ``explain`` returns the
       ``queryPlanner`` field.

   * - ``ok``
     - Whether the command has succeeded (``1``)
       or failed (``0``).

   * - ``operationTime``
     - The logical time of the operation. MongoDB uses the
       logical time to order operations.
       
       .. seealso::
  
          To learn more about logical time, see our blog post about the

>           :website:`Global Logical Clock </blog/post/transactions-background-part-4-the-global-logical-clock>`.

Reviewer 2: Take this out of an admonition since we are moving towards avoiding nested components

   * - ``$clusterTime``
     - A document that contains the signed cluster time. Cluster time is a
       logical time used for the ordering of operations.

       This document contains the following fields:

       - ``clusterTime``, the timestamp of the highest known cluster time for the member
       - ``signature``, a document that contains the hash of the cluster time and the ID
         of the key used to sign the cluster time

.. _rust-command-example:

Command Example
---------------

> The following code shows how you can use the ``command()`` method to run
> the ``explain`` command for a ``count`` operation on the ``flowers``
> collection of the ``plants`` database. The ``explain`` command runs in the

Reviewer 2: S: Simplify
```suggestion
The following example uses the ``command()`` method to run
the ``explain`` command for a ``count`` operation. The ``explain`` command runs in the
```

``"queryPlanner"`` verbosity mode:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/write/run-command.php
   :language: php
   :dedent:
   :start-after: start-runcommand
   :end-before: end-runcommand

Output

> ~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: Nit: I think we could probably remove this header, I don't think it adds much value

The output includes fields explaining the
execution of the ``count`` operation, such as the winning plan, which is
the plan selected by the query optimizer, and any rejected
plans. The output also contains information about the execution of the
``explain`` command:

.. code-block:: none
   :emphasize-lines: 2, 5-6

   string(1203)
   "[{"explainVersion":"1","queryPlanner":{"namespace":"plants.flowers",
   "indexFilterSet":false,"maxIndexedOrSolutionsReached":false,
   "maxIndexedAndSolutionsReached":false,"maxScansToExplodeReached":false,"winningPlan":
   {"stage":"RECORD_STORE_FAST_COUNT"},"rejectedPlans":[]},"command":{"count":"flowers",
   "$db":"plants"},"serverInfo":{"host":"...","port":27017,"version":"7.0.12",
   "gitVersion":"..."},"serverParameters":{...},"ok":1,"$clusterTime":{...},"signature":{...},
   "keyId":...}},"operationTime":{"$timestamp":{"t":1725637892,"i":12}}}]"

.. _php-addtl-info-runcommand:

Additional Information
----------------------

For more information about the concepts in this guide, see the following

> documentation in the Server manual:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation in the MongoDB Server manual:
```

- :manual:`db.runCommand() </reference/method/db.runCommand/>`
- :manual:`Database Commands </reference/command/>`

> - :manual:`hello Command </reference/command/hello/>`

Reviewer 2: If the earlier code example stays the same
```suggestion
- :manual:`ping Command </reference/command/ping/>`
```

   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: administration, code example

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the {+php-library+}
to run a database command. You can use database commands to perform a
variety of administrative and diagnostic tasks, such as fetching server
statistics, initializing a replica set, or running an aggregation pipeline.

.. important:: Prefer Library Methods to Database Commands

   The library provides wrapper methods for many database commands.
   We recommend using these methods instead of executing database
   commands when possible.
   
   To perform administrative tasks, use the :mongosh:`MongoDB Shell </>`
   instead of the {+php-library+}. Calling the ``db.runCommand()``
   method inside the shell is the preferred way to issue database
   commands, as it provides a consistent interface between the shell and
   drivers or libraries.

.. _php-execute-command:

Execute a Command
-----------------

To run a database command, you must specify the command and any relevant
parameters in a command document, then pass the command document to the
``MongoDB\Database::command()`` method. This method returns a

> ``Cursor`` object.

Reviewer 3: Should you add a link to https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.mongodb-driver-cursor.php?

Author: added to api docs links

The following code shows how you can use the ``command()``
method on a database to run the ``hello`` command, which returns
information about the current member's role in the replica set:

.. code-block:: php

>    $result = $database->command(['hello' => 1]);

Reviewer 3: You don't explain what `$database` is. It is an instance of `MongoDB\Driver\Database`  obtained by calling `$client->selectDatabase(<name>)`.

To find a link to a full list of database commands and corresponding
parameters, see the :ref:`Additional Information section
<php-addtl-info-runcommand>`.

.. note:: Read Preference

   The ``command()`` method does not
   obey the read preference you might have set on your ``Database``
   instance elsewhere in your code. By default, ``command()`` uses the ``primary``

>    read preference.

Reviewer 3: It seems that this first line could be longer (I hate manual line breaks).

Author: this probably arose from moving some sentences around!

     - Fields specific to the database command. For example,
       ``count`` returns the ``n`` field and ``explain`` returns the
       ``queryPlanner`` field.

   * - ``ok``
     - Whether the command has succeeded (``1``)
       or failed (``0``).

   * - ``operationTime``
     - The logical time of the operation. MongoDB uses the
       logical time to order operations. To learn more about this
       concept, see our blog  post about the :website:`Global Logical
       Clock </blog/post/transactions-background-part-4-the-global-logical-clock>`.

   * - ``$clusterTime``
     - A document that contains the signed cluster time. Cluster time is a
       logical time used for the ordering of operations.

       This document contains the following fields:

       - ``clusterTime``, the timestamp of the highest known cluster time for the member
       - ``signature``, a document that contains the hash of the cluster time and the ID
         of the key used to sign the cluster time

.. _php-command-example:

Command Example
---------------

The following example uses the ``command()`` method to run
the ``explain`` command for a ``count`` operation. The ``explain``

> command runs in the ``queryPlanner`` verbosity mode:

Reviewer 3: Note that the method `Collection::explain` exists.

Author: I see. I can use a different example, such as `dbStats` or something similar?
